#1385: updated pinning fallback methods (#1413)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05g-Testing-Network-Communication.md

The certificate can be pinned and hardcoded into the app or retrieved at the time the app first connects to the backend. In the latter case, the certificate is associated with ("pinned" to) the host when the host is seen for the first time. This alternative is less secure because attackers intercepting the initial connection can inject their own certificates.

Note that there are various ways to work with a failing pin:

- Inform the user about not being able to connect to the back-end and stop all operations. The app can check whether there is an update and inform the user about updating to the latest version of the app if available. 

>   - Additionally a call can be made to the back-end or to a crash-reporting service that the pinning has failed to inform the developer and/or back-end of the attack or misconfiguration.

Reviewer: note that below you write: "the back-end or crash-reporting service should be informed..." maybe decide on operation team vs crash-reporting service?

>   - Additionally a call can be made to the back-end or to a crash-reporting service that the pinning has failed to inform the developer and/or back-end of the attack or misconfiguration.

Author: I rather do not any of these :). For me, the most important is that the crash-reporting service and/or the backend-teams get them (given devops/secdevops). Based on that the teams can do what they want but i want either:
- the app-developer to see the crash reported so they know they have to fix stuff in case of a security misconfiguration, which is most often the case in terms of volume and user-frustration
- the backend-developer who is monitoring the systems (Devops 👍 )and sees these items comming in
- the risk-engine in case a security event is raised for a given customer, to indicate compromise of teh app if it is only a single app instance on which this happens.

>   - Additionally a call can be made to the back-end or to a crash-reporting service that the pinning has failed to inform the developer and/or back-end of the attack or misconfiguration.

Author: Changed the text accordingly

> - Only inform the back-end by doing a call with slightly different parameters, which automatically informs the back-end that pinning failed. From here on, only a limited amounts of APIs should be available which do not involve processing information that has a higher risk rating.

Reviewer 2: As we are not explaining this mechanism (call with slightly different parameters), what would be the difference to the previous way? 

Maybe we rephrase to make it easier:
- After calling the API or back-end and notify about the failing pinning, the app can still offer limited functionality that shouldn't involve sensitive functions or processing of sensitive data. The communication would happen without SSL Pinning and just validate the X.509 certificate accordingly. 

Does that make sense?

Reviewer: LGTM 

" and **notifying** about the failing...

Author: There would be a differnece in TLS handshake params, let me check how to get that done properly. The idea would be that we remain using TLS, but with some different data on the handshake, combining it with your feedback now 👍

> Which option you choose depends on how important availability is compared to the complexity of maintaining the application. In all cases the back-end or crash-reporting service should be informed in order to make sure that the app can be fixed in case of a misconfiguration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which option you choose depends on how important availability is compared to the complexity of maintaining the application. In all cases, the back-end or crash-reporting service should be informed in order to make sure that the app can be fixed in case of a misconfiguration.
```

The certificate can be pinned and hardcoded into the app or retrieved at the time the app first connects to the backend. In the latter case, the certificate is associated with ("pinned" to) the host when the host is seen for the first time. This alternative is less secure because attackers intercepting the initial connection can inject their own certificates.

Note that there are various ways to work with a failing pin:

> - Inform the user about not being able to connect to the back-end and stop all operations. The app can check whether there is an update and inform the user about updating to the latest version of the app if available.

Reviewer: style guide "back end"
```suggestion
- Inform the user about not being able to connect to the back end and stop all operations. The app can check whether there is an update and inform the user about updating to the latest version of the app if available.
```

Reviewer: This sounds like what "Pokémon Go" does. Once there's an update, they don't care that you're in the middle of nowhere. The app refuse to start, and redirects to the Play store so you can click on "Update" (and maybe you have to wait until the next Wi-Fi connection). So no Pokémons until you reach home, and that's ok for them.

**-> Should we highlight here that the app refuses to start completely? Maybe put the redirection to the Play Store as an example of how the app reacts?**

Author: I guess not. Developers and customers that have had this instructions before from me understood it. Lets try to become less verbose and to the point :-)

> - Do a call to a crash-reporting service that the pinning has failed to inform the responsible developer(s) for a security misconfiguration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do a call to a crash-reporting service including that the pinning has failed to notify the responsible developer(s) about a security misconfiguration.
```

> - Only inform the back-end by doing a call with slightly different parameters and no pinning enabled, which automatically informs the back-end that pinning failed. This can either be an HTTP request or a call usling TLS with additional information (e.g. extend an existing JWT token or add another value to a header).

Reviewer: typo + style guide "back end"
```suggestion
- Only inform the back end by doing a call with slightly different parameters and no pinning enabled, which automatically informs the back end that pinning failed. This can either be an HTTP request or a call using TLS with additional information (e.g. extend an existing JWT token or add another value to a header).
```

Reviewer: "with slightly different parameters" -> what are these parameters?

Author: See the next sentence. Will restructure

> - After calling the API or back-end to notify about the failing pinning, the app can still offer limited functionality that shouldn't involve sensitive functions or processing of sensitive data. The communication would happen without SSL Pinning and just validate the X.509 certificate accordingly.

Reviewer: style guide "back end"
```suggestion
- After calling the API or back end to notify about the failing pinning, the app can still offer limited functionality that shouldn't involve sensitive functions or processing of sensitive data. The communication would happen without SSL Pinning and just validate the X.509 certificate accordingly.
```

From here on, only a limited amounts of APIs should be available which do not involve processing information that has a higher risk rating.

> Which option(s) you choose depends on how important availability is compared to the complexity of maintaining the application. In all cases, the back-end or crash-reporting service should be informed in order to make sure that the app can be fixed in case of a misconfiguration or a security incident can be detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which option(s) you choose depends on how important availability is compared to the complexity of maintaining the application. In all cases, the back end or crash-reporting service should be informed in order to make sure that the app can be fixed in case of a misconfiguration or a security incident can be detected.
```

Reviewer: In "...should be informed in order to make sure that the app can be fixed in case of a misconfiguration or a security incident can be detected."

The last part sounds strange to me, "they will detect the incident" once informed of they are informed about an incident?

> When only a single app reports a pinning-failure, then this indicates a security issue with that app. In case multiple apps report it at once, it might be a clear indicator that the application distributed to the various mobile devices are pinning to key material that are not available a the TLS terminating endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When only a single app reports a pinning failure, then this indicates a security issue with that app. In case multiple apps report it at once, it might be a clear indicator that the pinned key material within the distributed app is wrong or is not available at the TLS terminating endpoint.
```

Reviewer: I would re-phase it like that. Plus I have a question regarding "...this indicates a security issue with that app". What could this be, could you please include an example (maybe in parenthesis)?

Author: Wilma restructure and explain

The certificate can be pinned and hardcoded into the app or retrieved at the time the app first connects to the backend. In the latter case, the certificate is associated with ("pinned" to) the host when the host is seen for the first time. This alternative is less secure because attackers intercepting the initial connection can inject their own certificates.

##### When the pin fails

Note that there are various ways to work with a failing pin:

- Inform the user about not being able to connect to the backend and stop all operations. The app can check whether there is an update and inform the user about updating to the latest version of the app if available. The app allows no longer for any form of interaction with the user until it is updated or the pin works again.
- Do a call to a crash-reporting service including that the pinning has failed to notify the responsible developer(s) about a security misconfiguration.
- The app calls the backend using a TLS enabled call with no pinning to inform the backend of a pinning failure. The call can either differ in user-agent, JWT token-contents, or have other headers with a flag enabled of pinning failure.

> - After calling the backend or crash-reporting service to notify about the failing pinning, the app can still offer limited functionality that shouldn't involve sensitive functions or processing of sensitive data. The communication would happen without SSL Pinning and just validate the X.509 certificate accordingly.

Author: I like the idea to reference to the L1 requirement :). But perhaps we can cut the sentences a bit off., let me give a shot 👍

> - After calling the backend or crash-reporting service to notify about the failing pinning, the app can still offer limited functionality that shouldn't involve sensitive functions or processing of sensitive data. The communication would happen without SSL Pinning and just validate the X.509 certificate accordingly.

Author: Hmm, all tries make it longer, shall we keep it this way? Otherwise it jsut gets more verbose ...

> - After calling the backend or crash-reporting service to notify about the failing pinning, the app can still offer limited functionality that shouldn't involve sensitive functions or processing of sensitive data. The communication would happen without SSL Pinning and just validate the X.509 certificate accordingly.

Reviewer: Ok sure :)

Which option(s) you choose depends on how important availability is compared to the complexity of maintaining the application.

When a large amount of pinfailures are reported to the backend or crash-reporting service, the developer should understand that there is probably a misconfiguration. There is a large chance that the keymaterials used at the TLS terminating endpoint (e.g. server/loadbalancer) is different than what the app is expecting. In that case an update of either that keymaterial or an update of the app should be pushed through.

> When only very few pinfailures are reported, then the network is sitll ok, and so is the configuration of the TLS terminating endpoint. Instead, it might well be that there is a Man in The Middle attack ongoing at the app instance of which the pin is failing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When only very few pin failures are reported, then the network should be ok, and so should be the configuration of the TLS terminating endpoint. Instead, it might well be that there is a man-in-the-middle attack ongoing at the app instance of which the pin is failing.
```
